.rn '' }`
''' $RCSfile$$Revision$$Date$
'''
''' $Log$
'''
.de Sh
.br
.if t .Sp
.ne 5
.PP
\fB\\$1\fR
.PP
..
.de Sp
.if t .sp .5v
.if n .sp
..
.de Ip
.br
.ie \\n(.$>=3 .ne \\$3
.el .ne 3
.IP "\\$1" \\$2
..
.de Vb
.ft CW
.nf
.ne \\$1
..
.de Ve
.ft R

.fi
..
'''
'''
'''     Set up \*(-- to give an unbreakable dash;
'''     string Tr holds user defined translation string.
'''     Bell System Logo is used as a dummy character.
'''
.tr \(*W-|\(bv\*(Tr
.ie n \{\
.ds -- \(*W-
.ds PI pi
.if (\n(.H=4u)&(1m=24u) .ds -- \(*W\h'-12u'\(*W\h'-12u'-\" diablo 10 pitch
.if (\n(.H=4u)&(1m=20u) .ds -- \(*W\h'-12u'\(*W\h'-8u'-\" diablo 12 pitch
.ds L" ""
.ds R" ""
'''   \*(M", \*(S", \*(N" and \*(T" are the equivalent of
'''   \*(L" and \*(R", except that they are used on ".xx" lines,
'''   such as .IP and .SH, which do another additional levels of
'''   double-quote interpretation
.ds M" """
.ds S" """
.ds N" """""
.ds T" """""
.ds L' '
.ds R' '
.ds M' '
.ds S' '
.ds N' '
.ds T' '
'br\}
.el\{\
.ds -- \(em\|
.tr \*(Tr
.ds L" ``
.ds R" ''
.ds M" ``
.ds S" ''
.ds N" ``
.ds T" ''
.ds L' `
.ds R' '
.ds M' `
.ds S' '
.ds N' `
.ds T' '
.ds PI \(*p
'br\}
.\"	If the F register is turned on, we'll generate
.\"	index entries out stderr for the following things:
.\"		TH	Title 
.\"		SH	Header
.\"		Sh	Subsection 
.\"		Ip	Item
.\"		X<>	Xref  (embedded
.\"	Of course, you have to process the output yourself
.\"	in some meaninful fashion.
.if \nF \{
.de IX
.tm Index:\\$1\t\\n%\t"\\$2"
..
.nr % 0
.rr F
.\}
.TH M2T 1 "Tela-1.30" "7/Dec/2000" "Tela Documentation"
.UC
.if n .hy 0
.if n .na
.ds C+ C\v'-.1v'\h'-1p'\s-2+\h'-1p'+\s0\v'.1v'\h'-1p'
.de CQ          \" put $1 in typewriter font
.ft CW
'if n "\c
'if t \\&\\$1\c
'if n \\&\\$1\c
'if n \&"
\\&\\$2 \\$3 \\$4 \\$5 \\$6 \\$7
'.ft R
..
.\" @(#)ms.acc 1.5 88/02/08 SMI; from UCB 4.2
.	\" AM - accent mark definitions
.bd B 3
.	\" fudge factors for nroff and troff
.if n \{\
.	ds #H 0
.	ds #V .8m
.	ds #F .3m
.	ds #[ \f1
.	ds #] \fP
.\}
.if t \{\
.	ds #H ((1u-(\\\\n(.fu%2u))*.13m)
.	ds #V .6m
.	ds #F 0
.	ds #[ \&
.	ds #] \&
.\}
.	\" simple accents for nroff and troff
.if n \{\
.	ds ' \&
.	ds ` \&
.	ds ^ \&
.	ds , \&
.	ds ~ ~
.	ds ? ?
.	ds ! !
.	ds /
.	ds q
.\}
.if t \{\
.	ds ' \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10-\*(#H)'\'\h"|\\n:u"
.	ds ` \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10-\*(#H)'\`\h'|\\n:u'
.	ds ^ \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*10/11-\*(#H)'^\h'|\\n:u'
.	ds , \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10)',\h'|\\n:u'
.	ds ~ \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu-\*(#H-.1m)'~\h'|\\n:u'
.	ds ? \s-2c\h'-\w'c'u*7/10'\u\h'\*(#H'\zi\d\s+2\h'\w'c'u*8/10'
.	ds ! \s-2\(or\s+2\h'-\w'\(or'u'\v'-.8m'.\v'.8m'
.	ds / \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10-\*(#H)'\z\(sl\h'|\\n:u'
.	ds q o\h'-\w'o'u*8/10'\s-4\v'.4m'\z\(*i\v'-.4m'\s+4\h'\w'o'u*8/10'
.\}
.	\" troff and (daisy-wheel) nroff accents
.ds : \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10-\*(#H+.1m+\*(#F)'\v'-\*(#V'\z.\h'.2m+\*(#F'.\h'|\\n:u'\v'\*(#V'
.ds 8 \h'\*(#H'\(*b\h'-\*(#H'
.ds v \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*9/10-\*(#H)'\v'-\*(#V'\*(#[\s-4v\s0\v'\*(#V'\h'|\\n:u'\*(#]
.ds _ \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*9/10-\*(#H+(\*(#F*2/3))'\v'-.4m'\z\(hy\v'.4m'\h'|\\n:u'
.ds . \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10)'\v'\*(#V*4/10'\z.\v'-\*(#V*4/10'\h'|\\n:u'
.ds 3 \*(#[\v'.2m'\s-2\&3\s0\v'-.2m'\*(#]
.ds o \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu+\w'\(de'u-\*(#H)/2u'\v'-.3n'\*(#[\z\(de\v'.3n'\h'|\\n:u'\*(#]
.ds d- \h'\*(#H'\(pd\h'-\w'~'u'\v'-.25m'\f2\(hy\fP\v'.25m'\h'-\*(#H'
.ds D- D\\k:\h'-\w'D'u'\v'-.11m'\z\(hy\v'.11m'\h'|\\n:u'
.ds th \*(#[\v'.3m'\s+1I\s-1\v'-.3m'\h'-(\w'I'u*2/3)'\s-1o\s+1\*(#]
.ds Th \*(#[\s+2I\s-2\h'-\w'I'u*3/5'\v'-.3m'o\v'.3m'\*(#]
.ds ae a\h'-(\w'a'u*4/10)'e
.ds Ae A\h'-(\w'A'u*4/10)'E
.ds oe o\h'-(\w'o'u*4/10)'e
.ds Oe O\h'-(\w'O'u*4/10)'E
.	\" corrections for vroff
.if v .ds ~ \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*9/10-\*(#H)'\s-2\u~\d\s+2\h'|\\n:u'
.if v .ds ^ \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*10/11-\*(#H)'\v'-.4m'^\v'.4m'\h'|\\n:u'
.	\" for low resolution devices (crt and lpr)
.if \n(.H>23 .if \n(.V>19 \
\{\
.	ds : e
.	ds 8 ss
.	ds v \h'-1'\o'\(aa\(ga'
.	ds _ \h'-1'^
.	ds . \h'-1'.
.	ds 3 3
.	ds o a
.	ds d- d\h'-1'\(ga
.	ds D- D\h'-1'\(hy
.	ds th \o'bp'
.	ds Th \o'LP'
.	ds ae ae
.	ds Ae AE
.	ds oe oe
.	ds Oe OE
.\}
.rm #[ #] #H #V #F C
.SH "NAME"
m2t \- Matlab to Tela translator
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
\fBm2t\fR	[\ \fB\-s\fR\ ] [\ \fB\-d\fR\ ] [\ \fB\-v\fR\ ]  [\ \fIm-file\fR\ [\ \fIm-file\fR\ [...]\ ]\ ]
.PP
\fBm2t\fR	[\ \fB\-s\fR\ ] [\ \fB\-d\fR\ ] [\ \fB\-v\fR\ ] [\ \fB\-F\fR\ ] [\ \fB\-S\fR\ ] \fB\-m\fR [\ \fIm-file\fR\ [\ \fIm-file\fR\ [...]\ ]\ ]
.PP
\fBm2t\fR	[\ \fB\-h\fR\ |\ \fB\-?\fR\ ]
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
\fBm2t\fR translates Matlab m-files into Tela t-files.
.PP
The first form takes one or more m-files from the command line or, if
no m-file is given, from standard input, translates them into Tela's
format, and prints them on standard output.  Usually, with this form,
only one file is translated at a time.
.PP
The second form takes one ore more m-files from the command line, and
translates each of them into a seperate t-file with the same name as
the m-file's basename and the extension \fI.t\fR appended.
.PP
The third form displays a brief help message.
.SH "OPTIONS"
.Ip "\fB\-s\fR" 8
Silent mode: suppress all warnings.
.Ip "\fB\-v\fR" 8
Verbose mode: print a symbol table for each file.
.Ip "\fB\-d\fR" 8
Suppress matrix division warnings.
.Ip "\fB\-m\fR" 8
Multi-file mode: generate t-files using the respective m-file
basenames.
.Ip "\fB\-F\fR" 8
Ignore script files, translate functions only.
.Ip "\fB\-S\fR" 8
Ignore function files, translate scripts only.
.Ip "\fB\-h\fR, \fB\-?\fR" 8
Display help message.
.SH "EXAMPLES"
Translate \fImyfun.m\fR into \fImyfun.t\fR:
.PP
.Vb 1
\&    m2t myfun.m > myfun.t
.Ve
or
.PP
.Vb 1
\&    m2t < myfun.m > myfun.t
.Ve
Compile all function files in the current working directory into
\fIfuncs.t\fR:
.PP
.Vb 1
\&    m2t -F *.m > funcs.t    
.Ve
Translate all m-scripts in the current working directory into separate
t-files:
.PP
.Vb 1
\&    m2t -Sm *.m            
.Ve
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.PP
.Vb 5
\&    tela        Tela interpreter
\&    telakka     Tela extension utility
\&    ctpp        Tela preprocessor
\&    plotmtv     Standard associated graphics package
\&    sppc        Alternative graphics package
.Ve
.SH "WARNINGS"
.Ip "\(bu" 4
Use \fBm2t\fR at your own risk!  You must almost always do some hand
editing afterwards.  \fBm2t\fR is intended to make the transition to Tela
easier, not to \*(L"emulate\*(R" Matlab.
.Ip "\(bu" 4
It may be possible to violate the law by translating copyrighted
Matlab code to Tela.  The authors of this program do not take any
responsibility for that kind of problems, and you as a user must find
out under what conditions you can use this program.
.SH "HISTORY"
m2t by Pekka\ Janhunen; man page by Ch.\ L.\ Spiel, 2000-12-7.

.rn }` ''
.IX Title "M2T 1"
.IX Name "m2t - Matlab to Tela translator"

.IX Header "NAME"

.IX Header "SYNOPSIS"

.IX Header "DESCRIPTION"

.IX Header "OPTIONS"

.IX Item "\fB\-s\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-v\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-d\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-m\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-F\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-S\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-h\fR, \fB\-?\fR"

.IX Header "EXAMPLES"

.IX Header "SEE ALSO"

.IX Header "WARNINGS"

.IX Item "\(bu"

.IX Item "\(bu"

.IX Header "HISTORY"

