=head1 NAME

m2t - Matlab to Tela translator

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<m2t>	S<[ B<-s> ]> S<[ B<-d> ]> S<[ B<-v> ]>  S<[ I<m-file> [ I<m-file> [...] ] ]>

B<m2t>	S<[ B<-s> ]> S<[ B<-d> ]> S<[ B<-v> ]> S<[ B<-F> ]> S<[ B<-S> ]> B<-m> S<[ I<m-file> [ I<m-file> [...] ] ]>

B<m2t>	S<[ B<-h> | B<-?> ]>

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<m2t> translates Matlab m-files into Tela t-files.

The first form takes one or more m-files from the command line or, if
no m-file is given, from standard input, translates them into Tela's
format, and prints them on standard output.  Usually, with this form,
only one file is translated at a time.

The second form takes one ore more m-files from the command line, and
translates each of them into a seperate t-file with the same name as
the m-file's basename and the extension I<.t> appended.

The third form displays a brief help message.

=head1 OPTIONS

=over 8

=item B<-s>

Silent mode: suppress all warnings.

=item B<-v>

Verbose mode: print a symbol table for each file.

=item B<-d>

Suppress matrix division warnings.

=item B<-m>

Multi-file mode: generate t-files using the respective m-file
basenames.

=item B<-F>

Ignore script files, translate functions only.

=item B<-S>

Ignore function files, translate scripts only.

=item B<-h>, B<-?>

Display help message.

=back

=head1 EXAMPLES

Translate I<myfun.m> into I<myfun.t>:

    m2t myfun.m > myfun.t

or

    m2t < myfun.m > myfun.t

Compile all function files in the current working directory into
I<funcs.t>:

    m2t -F *.m > funcs.t    

Translate all m-scripts in the current working directory into separate
t-files:

    m2t -Sm *.m            

=head1 SEE ALSO

    tela	Tela interpreter
    telakka	Tela extension utility
    ctpp	Tela preprocessor
    plotmtv	Standard associated graphics package
    sppc	Alternative graphics package

=head1 WARNINGS

=over 4

=item *

Use B<m2t> at your own risk!  You must almost always do some hand
editing afterwards.  B<m2t> is intended to make the transition to Tela
easier, not to "emulate" Matlab.

=item *

It may be possible to violate the law by translating copyrighted
Matlab code to Tela.  The authors of this program do not take any
responsibility for that kind of problems, and you as a user must find
out under what conditions you can use this program.

=back

=head1 HISTORY

m2t by S<Pekka Janhunen>; man page by S<Ch. L. Spiel>, 2000-12-7.
