=head1 NAME

sppc - Simple Plot Panel Composer

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<sppc>	B<-gl> S<[ B<-nocopyright> ]> S<[ I<sppc-file> ]>

B<sppc>	B<-ps> S<[ B<-landscape> | B<-portrait> ]> S<[ B<-papertype> I<type> ]> S<[ I<sppc-file> ]>

B<sppc>	B<-ppm>  S<[ B<-nocopyright> ]> S<[ I<sppc-file> ]>

B<sppc>	B<-gif> S<[ B<-fast> | B<-slow> | B<-best> ]> S<[ I<sppc-file> ]>

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<sppc> displays or translates the sppc-graphic files.  It either
reads from the sppc-file given at the command line, or, if no filename
is supplied from standard input.

The first from displays the graphics in an OpenGL window.

The second to fourth form translate the sppc-file into different
formats: PostScript, PPM, or GIF.  The output always goes to standard
output.

=head1 OPTIONS

Output format options:

=over 8

=item B<-ps>

Write a PostScript file to standard output.

=item B<-gl>

Open an OpenGL window, display the graphics, and wait for C-C.

=item B<-ppm>

Write a PPM file to standard output.

=item B<-gif>

Write a GIF file to standard output.

=back

Media options:

=over 8

=item B<-papertype> I<Type>

I<Type>       ::= I<Predefined> | I<Variable>

I<Predefined> ::= B<a4> | B<a3> | B<b5> | B<letter> | B<legal> | B<tabloid>

I<Variable>   ::= I<Height>xI<Width>I<Unit>

I<Unit>       ::= B<cm> | B<in> | B<mm> | B<pt>

I<Height>, I<Width> are decimal numbers.

=item B<-landscape>

Select landscape paper orientation.

=item B<-portrait>

Select upright paper orientation.  This is the default.

=back

The following options are only available in GIF mode.

=over 8

=item B<-fast>

Select "fast" 24bit to 8bit conversion.

=item B<-slow>

Select "slow" 24bit to 8bit conversion.  This is the default.

=item B<-best>

Select "best" 24bit to 8bit conversion.  This is slower than B<-slow>.

=back

The next option is only applies in GL and PPM modes.

=over 8

=item B<-nocopyright>

Suppress copyright line in GL and PPM images.

=back

=head1 EXAMPLES

    sppc -gl test.sppc

    sppc -ps test.sppc > test.ps

=head1 SEE ALSO

    tela	Tela interpreter
    telakka	Tela extension utility
    ctpp	Tela preprocessor
    plotmtv	Standard associated graphics package
    m2t		Matlab to Tela translator

=head1 HISTORY

sppc by S<Pekka Janhunen>; man page by S<Ch. L. Spiel>, 2000-12-7.
