=head1 NAME

telakka - TeLa Kernel Konstruction Accessory

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<telakka> S<[ B<-v> | B<--verbose> ]> S<[ B<-o> I<file> | B<--output> I<file> ]>
        S<[ I<CFLAGS> ]> S<[ I<files> ]>

B<telakka> S<[ B<-v> | B<--verbose> ]> S<[ B<-o> I<file> | B<--output> I<file> ]>
        S<[ B<-c> | B<--compile-only> ]> S<[ I<CFLAGS> ]> S<[ I<files> ]>

B<telakka> S<[ B<-v> | B<--verbose> ]> S<[ B<-o> I<file> | B<--output> I<file> ]>
        S<[ B<--shared> ]> S<[ I<CFLAGS> ]> S<[ I<files> ]>

B<telakka> S<B<-V> | B<--version>>

B<telakka> S<B<-h> | B<--help>>

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<telakka> compiles I<files> or links them with appropriate libraries
to produce a new B<tela> executable S<(form 1)>, object files S<(form
2)>, or a dynamic library S<(form 3)>.

I<CFLAGS> are any additional flags for the C++ compiler.

I<files> are ".ct", ".o", or ".a" files to be compiled or linked.

=over 8

=item .ct -> B<tela>    (form 1)

If neither B<-c>, nor B<--shared> is given, B<telakka> builds a new
Tela-kernel, extended by the functions in I<files>.

=item .ct -> .o      (form 2)

To compile one or more I<files> to object files, use B<-c>, or
B<--compile-only>.  If no output filename is given with S<B<-o>
I<file>> or S<B<--output> I<file>>, each of the specified I<files> are
compiled to object files.  If an output filename is specified, only
one ct-file can be compiled at a time.

=item .ct -> .so     (form 3)

To compile one or more I<files> to a shared object, use B<--shared>.
(The operating system must support dynamic objects for this option to
work.)  The resulting shared object file is linked with B<tela> at
runtime, see link().  B<telakka> derives the name of the shared object
from the name of the B<first> input file unless an explicit output
filename is given with S<B<-o> I<file>> or S<B<--output> I<file>>.

=back

B<telakka> displays its own version number and the version of the
associated B<tela> binary when called with the B<-V> or B<--version>
options S<(form 4)>.

Use B<-h> or B<--help> to show a brief summary of B<telakka>'s command
line options S<(form 5)>.

=head1 OPTIONS

B<telakka> understands the following options:

=over 8

=item B<-h>, B<--help>

Display help message and exit.

=item B<-c>, B<--compile-only>

Compile only, do not link (see gcc(1)).  This option is mutually
exclusive with B<--shared>.

=item B<-n>, B<--nostandard>

This option has no effect and is only included for backward
compatability.

=item B<-o> I<file>, B<--output> I<file>

Specify the name of output file. The default value is "tela", or in
compile-only mode the base-name of the ct-file with ".o" appended, or
in shared mode the base-name of the first ct-file with ".so" appended.

=item B<--shared>

Compile and link given files to produce a shared object.  The output
filename is the first ct-file's basename with ".so" appended.

=item B<-v>, B<--verbose>

Switch on verbose mode.

=item B<-V>, B<--version>

Print version of B<telakka> and B<tela>, then exit.

=back

=head1 SEE ALSO

    tela	Tela interpreter
    ctpp	Tela preprocessor
    plotmtv	Standard associated graphics package
    sppc	Alternative graphics package
    m2t		Matlab to Tela translator

=head1 HISTORY

telakka by S<Pekka Janhunen>; man page by S<Ch. L. Spiel>, 2000-11-7.
