.rn '' }`
''' $RCSfile$$Revision$$Date$
'''
''' $Log$
'''
.de Sh
.br
.if t .Sp
.ne 5
.PP
\fB\\$1\fR
.PP
..
.de Sp
.if t .sp .5v
.if n .sp
..
.de Ip
.br
.ie \\n(.$>=3 .ne \\$3
.el .ne 3
.IP "\\$1" \\$2
..
.de Vb
.ft CW
.nf
.ne \\$1
..
.de Ve
.ft R

.fi
..
'''
'''
'''     Set up \*(-- to give an unbreakable dash;
'''     string Tr holds user defined translation string.
'''     Bell System Logo is used as a dummy character.
'''
.tr \(*W-|\(bv\*(Tr
.ie n \{\
.ds -- \(*W-
.ds PI pi
.if (\n(.H=4u)&(1m=24u) .ds -- \(*W\h'-12u'\(*W\h'-12u'-\" diablo 10 pitch
.if (\n(.H=4u)&(1m=20u) .ds -- \(*W\h'-12u'\(*W\h'-8u'-\" diablo 12 pitch
.ds L" ""
.ds R" ""
'''   \*(M", \*(S", \*(N" and \*(T" are the equivalent of
'''   \*(L" and \*(R", except that they are used on ".xx" lines,
'''   such as .IP and .SH, which do another additional levels of
'''   double-quote interpretation
.ds M" """
.ds S" """
.ds N" """""
.ds T" """""
.ds L' '
.ds R' '
.ds M' '
.ds S' '
.ds N' '
.ds T' '
'br\}
.el\{\
.ds -- \(em\|
.tr \*(Tr
.ds L" ``
.ds R" ''
.ds M" ``
.ds S" ''
.ds N" ``
.ds T" ''
.ds L' `
.ds R' '
.ds M' `
.ds S' '
.ds N' `
.ds T' '
.ds PI \(*p
'br\}
.\"	If the F register is turned on, we'll generate
.\"	index entries out stderr for the following things:
.\"		TH	Title 
.\"		SH	Header
.\"		Sh	Subsection 
.\"		Ip	Item
.\"		X<>	Xref  (embedded
.\"	Of course, you have to process the output yourself
.\"	in some meaninful fashion.
.if \nF \{
.de IX
.tm Index:\\$1\t\\n%\t"\\$2"
..
.nr % 0
.rr F
.\}
.TH TELAKKA 1 "Tela-1.30" "7/Dec/2000" "Tela Documentation"
.UC
.if n .hy 0
.if n .na
.ds C+ C\v'-.1v'\h'-1p'\s-2+\h'-1p'+\s0\v'.1v'\h'-1p'
.de CQ          \" put $1 in typewriter font
.ft CW
'if n "\c
'if t \\&\\$1\c
'if n \\&\\$1\c
'if n \&"
\\&\\$2 \\$3 \\$4 \\$5 \\$6 \\$7
'.ft R
..
.\" @(#)ms.acc 1.5 88/02/08 SMI; from UCB 4.2
.	\" AM - accent mark definitions
.bd B 3
.	\" fudge factors for nroff and troff
.if n \{\
.	ds #H 0
.	ds #V .8m
.	ds #F .3m
.	ds #[ \f1
.	ds #] \fP
.\}
.if t \{\
.	ds #H ((1u-(\\\\n(.fu%2u))*.13m)
.	ds #V .6m
.	ds #F 0
.	ds #[ \&
.	ds #] \&
.\}
.	\" simple accents for nroff and troff
.if n \{\
.	ds ' \&
.	ds ` \&
.	ds ^ \&
.	ds , \&
.	ds ~ ~
.	ds ? ?
.	ds ! !
.	ds /
.	ds q
.\}
.if t \{\
.	ds ' \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10-\*(#H)'\'\h"|\\n:u"
.	ds ` \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10-\*(#H)'\`\h'|\\n:u'
.	ds ^ \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*10/11-\*(#H)'^\h'|\\n:u'
.	ds , \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10)',\h'|\\n:u'
.	ds ~ \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu-\*(#H-.1m)'~\h'|\\n:u'
.	ds ? \s-2c\h'-\w'c'u*7/10'\u\h'\*(#H'\zi\d\s+2\h'\w'c'u*8/10'
.	ds ! \s-2\(or\s+2\h'-\w'\(or'u'\v'-.8m'.\v'.8m'
.	ds / \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10-\*(#H)'\z\(sl\h'|\\n:u'
.	ds q o\h'-\w'o'u*8/10'\s-4\v'.4m'\z\(*i\v'-.4m'\s+4\h'\w'o'u*8/10'
.\}
.	\" troff and (daisy-wheel) nroff accents
.ds : \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10-\*(#H+.1m+\*(#F)'\v'-\*(#V'\z.\h'.2m+\*(#F'.\h'|\\n:u'\v'\*(#V'
.ds 8 \h'\*(#H'\(*b\h'-\*(#H'
.ds v \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*9/10-\*(#H)'\v'-\*(#V'\*(#[\s-4v\s0\v'\*(#V'\h'|\\n:u'\*(#]
.ds _ \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*9/10-\*(#H+(\*(#F*2/3))'\v'-.4m'\z\(hy\v'.4m'\h'|\\n:u'
.ds . \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*8/10)'\v'\*(#V*4/10'\z.\v'-\*(#V*4/10'\h'|\\n:u'
.ds 3 \*(#[\v'.2m'\s-2\&3\s0\v'-.2m'\*(#]
.ds o \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu+\w'\(de'u-\*(#H)/2u'\v'-.3n'\*(#[\z\(de\v'.3n'\h'|\\n:u'\*(#]
.ds d- \h'\*(#H'\(pd\h'-\w'~'u'\v'-.25m'\f2\(hy\fP\v'.25m'\h'-\*(#H'
.ds D- D\\k:\h'-\w'D'u'\v'-.11m'\z\(hy\v'.11m'\h'|\\n:u'
.ds th \*(#[\v'.3m'\s+1I\s-1\v'-.3m'\h'-(\w'I'u*2/3)'\s-1o\s+1\*(#]
.ds Th \*(#[\s+2I\s-2\h'-\w'I'u*3/5'\v'-.3m'o\v'.3m'\*(#]
.ds ae a\h'-(\w'a'u*4/10)'e
.ds Ae A\h'-(\w'A'u*4/10)'E
.ds oe o\h'-(\w'o'u*4/10)'e
.ds Oe O\h'-(\w'O'u*4/10)'E
.	\" corrections for vroff
.if v .ds ~ \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*9/10-\*(#H)'\s-2\u~\d\s+2\h'|\\n:u'
.if v .ds ^ \\k:\h'-(\\n(.wu*10/11-\*(#H)'\v'-.4m'^\v'.4m'\h'|\\n:u'
.	\" for low resolution devices (crt and lpr)
.if \n(.H>23 .if \n(.V>19 \
\{\
.	ds : e
.	ds 8 ss
.	ds v \h'-1'\o'\(aa\(ga'
.	ds _ \h'-1'^
.	ds . \h'-1'.
.	ds 3 3
.	ds o a
.	ds d- d\h'-1'\(ga
.	ds D- D\h'-1'\(hy
.	ds th \o'bp'
.	ds Th \o'LP'
.	ds ae ae
.	ds Ae AE
.	ds oe oe
.	ds Oe OE
.\}
.rm #[ #] #H #V #F C
.SH "NAME"
telakka \- TeLa Kernel Konstruction Accessory
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
\fBtelakka\fR [\ \fB\-v\fR\ |\ \fB--verbose\fR\ ] [\ \fB\-o\fR\ \fIfile\fR\ |\ \fB--output\fR\ \fIfile\fR\ ]
        [\ \fICFLAGS\fR\ ] [\ \fIfiles\fR\ ]
.PP
\fBtelakka\fR [\ \fB\-v\fR\ |\ \fB--verbose\fR\ ] [\ \fB\-o\fR\ \fIfile\fR\ |\ \fB--output\fR\ \fIfile\fR\ ]
        [\ \fB\-c\fR\ |\ \fB--compile-only\fR\ ] [\ \fICFLAGS\fR\ ] [\ \fIfiles\fR\ ]
.PP
\fBtelakka\fR [\ \fB\-v\fR\ |\ \fB--verbose\fR\ ] [\ \fB\-o\fR\ \fIfile\fR\ |\ \fB--output\fR\ \fIfile\fR\ ]
        [\ \fB--shared\fR\ ] [\ \fICFLAGS\fR\ ] [\ \fIfiles\fR\ ]
.PP
\fBtelakka\fR \fB\-V\fR\ |\ \fB--version\fR
.PP
\fBtelakka\fR \fB\-h\fR\ |\ \fB--help\fR
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
\fBtelakka\fR compiles \fIfiles\fR or links them with appropriate libraries
to produce a new \fBtela\fR executable (form\ 1), object files (form
2), or a dynamic library (form\ 3).
.PP
\fICFLAGS\fR are any additional flags for the \*(C+ compiler.
.PP
\fIfiles\fR are \*(L".ct\*(R", \*(L".o\*(R", or \*(L".a\*(R" files to be compiled or linked.
.Ip ".ct \-> \fBtela\fR    (form 1)" 8
If neither \fB\-c\fR, nor \fB--shared\fR is given, \fBtelakka\fR builds a new
Tela-kernel, extended by the functions in \fIfiles\fR.
.Ip ".ct \-> .o      (form 2)" 8
To compile one or more \fIfiles\fR to object files, use \fB\-c\fR, or
\fB--compile-only\fR.  If no output filename is given with \fB\-o\fR
\fIfile\fR or \fB--output\fR\ \fIfile\fR, each of the specified \fIfiles\fR are
compiled to object files.  If an output filename is specified, only
one ct-file can be compiled at a time.
.Ip ".ct \-> .so     (form 3)" 8
To compile one or more \fIfiles\fR to a shared object, use \fB--shared\fR.
(The operating system must support dynamic objects for this option to
work.)  The resulting shared object file is linked with \fBtela\fR at
runtime, see \fIlink()\fR.  \fBtelakka\fR derives the name of the shared object
from the name of the \fBfirst\fR input file unless an explicit output
filename is given with \fB\-o\fR\ \fIfile\fR or \fB--output\fR\ \fIfile\fR.
.PP
\fBtelakka\fR displays its own version number and the version of the
associated \fBtela\fR binary when called with the \fB\-V\fR or \fB--version\fR
options (form\ 4).
.PP
Use \fB\-h\fR or \fB--help\fR to show a brief summary of \fBtelakka\fR's command
line options (form\ 5).
.SH "OPTIONS"
\fBtelakka\fR understands the following options:
.Ip "\fB\-h\fR, \fB--help\fR" 8
Display help message and exit.
.Ip "\fB\-c\fR, \fB--compile-only\fR" 8
Compile only, do not link (see \fIgcc\fR\|(1)).  This option is mutually
exclusive with \fB--shared\fR.
.Ip "\fB\-n\fR, \fB--nostandard\fR" 8
This option has no effect and is only included for backward
compatability.
.Ip "\fB\-o\fR \fIfile\fR, \fB--output\fR \fIfile\fR" 8
Specify the name of output file. The default value is \*(L"tela\*(R", or in
compile-only mode the base-name of the ct-file with \*(L".o\*(R" appended, or
in shared mode the base-name of the first ct-file with \*(L".so\*(R" appended.
.Ip "\fB--shared\fR" 8
Compile and link given files to produce a shared object.  The output
filename is the first ct-file's basename with \*(L".so\*(R" appended.
.Ip "\fB\-v\fR, \fB--verbose\fR" 8
Switch on verbose mode.
.Ip "\fB\-V\fR, \fB--version\fR" 8
Print version of \fBtelakka\fR and \fBtela\fR, then exit.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.PP
.Vb 5
\&    tela        Tela interpreter
\&    ctpp        Tela preprocessor
\&    plotmtv     Standard associated graphics package
\&    sppc        Alternative graphics package
\&    m2t         Matlab to Tela translator
.Ve
.SH "HISTORY"
telakka by Pekka\ Janhunen; man page by Ch.\ L.\ Spiel, 2000-11-7.

.rn }` ''
.IX Title "TELAKKA 1"
.IX Name "telakka - TeLa Kernel Konstruction Accessory"

.IX Header "NAME"

.IX Header "SYNOPSIS"

.IX Header "DESCRIPTION"

.IX Item ".ct \-> \fBtela\fR    (form 1)"

.IX Item ".ct \-> .o      (form 2)"

.IX Item ".ct \-> .so     (form 3)"

.IX Header "OPTIONS"

.IX Item "\fB\-h\fR, \fB--help\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-c\fR, \fB--compile-only\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-n\fR, \fB--nostandard\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-o\fR \fIfile\fR, \fB--output\fR \fIfile\fR"

.IX Item "\fB--shared\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-v\fR, \fB--verbose\fR"

.IX Item "\fB\-V\fR, \fB--version\fR"

.IX Header "SEE ALSO"

.IX Header "HISTORY"

