.\" $FMI/GEO: m2t.1,v 1.0 94/11/20 14:40:00 pjanhune $
.TH M2T 1 "Version 1.0" ""
.SH NAME
m2t \- Matlab to Tela translator
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B m2t
[
.B \-h
] [
.B -?
]                  (give help)
.br
.B m2t
[
.B \-svd
] <file.m >file.t       (basic usage)
.br
.B m2t
[
.B \-FSmsvd
] files.m >file.t    (many files at once)
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fIm2t\fP is an auxiliary program to be used with \fItela\fP(1).  It
translates \fIMatlab\fP function and script M-files to t-files, which can
be executed from Tela using the function \fIsource\fP.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP 8
.B \-F
Process Function files only, ignore script files.
.TP 8
.B \-S
Process Script files only, ignore function files.
.TP 8
.B \-m
Multi-file mode: generate .t files using .m file basenames.
.TP 8
.B \-s
Silent mode, suppress all warnings.
.TP 8
.B \-v
Verbose mode, output symbol tables etc.
.TP 8
.B \-d
Suppress matrix division warnings. Matlab's matrix division \fI/\fP
is translated to \fI/\fP, although in \fITela\fP it means pointwise
division. Thus \fIm2t\fP by default warns at every \fI/\fP operator
it encounters. If the Matlab code never uses \fI/\fP for true
matrix divisions, you can safely ignore these warnings. If it does,
you must hand-edit the \fI.t\fP file to call \fILinearSolve\fP.
.TP 8
.B \-h, \-?
Print usage instructions alike this manpage.
.SH BUGS (Really too numerous to list)
\fIm2t\fP does not even try to be a true faithful translator.
Almost always you have to edit the resulting code at some places.
In short, \fIm2t\fP only translates the basic language constructs
correctly, but does not try to do a complete job in translating
the semantic and syntax of every possible function that are slightly
different in Matlab and Tela. However it does translate
some of the most frequently used functions, such as \fIzeros\fP,
correctly.

In addition to differences in individual functions, there are two
other areas where \fIm2t\fP may have considerable difficulties.
These are Matlab array constructors \fI[...]\fP, where the components
are not separated by commas. Leaving the commas out is legal in Matlab
but not in Tela. For example, \fI[a 1+ b c +d]\fP is legal in Matlab,
and it means \fI[a, 1+b, c, d]\fP. To avoid trouble, always \fIwrite commas
where they belong in any new Matlab code you write\fP.

The second problematic issue is in deciding when a reference \fIa(i)\fP
means array reference or function call, because in Tela array references
use brackets while function calls use parentheses. The translator tries
to make an educated guess. For example, if \fIa\fP has been previously
assigned to, or if it is one of the function arguments, \fIa(i)\fP
is array reference. Sometimes the translator guesses wrong, and you have to
\fIbe prepared to changing parentheses to brackets or vice versa\fP.

The function header should be on one line in order to be interpreted correctly.
Some of the function conversions, like zeros(n,n) -> zeros(n) work correctly
only when n is a simple expression containing no parentheses.
.SH REPORTING BUGS
If you want to, you can use the usual \fITela\fP email aliases
<\fItela-bugs@fmi.fi\fP> and <\fItela-suggestions@fmi.fi\fP>
for \fIm2t\fP as well.
However, correcting \fIm2t\fP bugs has a much lower priority than fixing
\fITela\fP bugs. If you have experience and interest in writing translators,
be encouraged to improve \fIm2t\fP and sharing your code with the author!
.SH FILES
.TP 8
.I *.m
(Input) \fIMatlab\fP script or function M-files.
.TP 8
.I *.t
(Output) \fITela\fP source code files.
.SH SEE ALSO
\fItela\fP(1), the \fITe\fPnsor \fILa\fPnguage.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright 1994, Pekka Janhunen.
.SH COPYING POLICY
GNU General Public License (\fIGPL\fP) version 2 or later.
.SH AUTHORS
Pekka Janhunen <Pekka.Janhunen@fmi.fi>,
.br
Finnish Meteorological Institute/
.br
Dept. of Geophysics (\fIFMI/GEO\fP).

