.\" $FMI/GEO: tela.1,v 1.22 95/04/03 09:38:50 pjanhune $
.TH TELA 1 "Version 1.22" ""
.SH NAME
tela \- the tensor language
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B tela
[
.B \-bfhsvV?
] [
.B -e \fPcode
] [
.B \-\-batch
] [
.B \-\-execute \fPcode
] [
.B \-\-fast
] [
.B \-\-help
] [
.B \-\-silent
] [
.B \-\-verbose
] [
.B \-\-version
] [
.I inputfiles.t
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fITela\fP is a numerical computing environment mainly targeted for
numerical simulation pre- and postprocessing work. The language supports
arbitrary rank arrays (hence the name, \fITe\fPnsor \fILa\fPnguage), and has
powerful programming capabilities including \fIF90\fP style vector notation.
Two- and three-dimensional graphics is implemented by calling \fIPlotMTV\fP.

The on-line help is intended to be the primary source of documentation.
The command \fIhelp\fP gives help for individual reserved words, function
names etc. The function \fIdocview()\fP can be used to view the same
documentation in various other formats, including user-friendly \fIHTML\fP
files.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP 15
.B \-\-batch
Quit after executing \fI--execute\fP options and named input files
instead of entering interactive mode. User code can query this flag
by calling \fIBatchMode()\fP.
.TP 15
.B \-\-execute \fPcode
Execute code string before starting up.
.TP 15
.B \-\-fast
Do not source telainit.t on startup.
.TP 15
.B \-\-help
Give a short help message and make a successful exit.
.TP 15
.B \-\-silent
Suppress all unnecessary messages. User code can query this flag by calling
\fISilentMode()\fP.
.TP 15
.B \-\-verbose
Set \fItela\fP very verbose: list treecode and flatcode as generated.
Usually it is better to set this mode temporarily by calling \fIVerboseMode(on)\fP
because many messages are generated by the startup phase.
.TP 15
.B \-\-version
Print version number and make a succesful exit. Corresponding Tela function is
\fIversion()\P.
.TP 15
.B \-b
Same as \fB\-\-batch\fP.
.TP 15
.B \-e \fPcode
Same as \fB\-\-execute\fP code.
.TP 15
.B \-f
Same as \fB\-\-fast\fP.
.TP 15
.B \-h, \-?
Same as \fB\-\-help\fP.
.TP 15
.B \-s
Same as \fB\-\-silent\fP.
.TP 15
.B \-v
Same as \fB\-\-verbose\fP.
.TP 15
.B \-V
Same as \fB\-\-version\fP.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.B TELAPATH
is a list of directories, separated by colons, where \fItela\fP
should look for its scripts and help files. If \fITELAPATH\fP
is not set, a built-in default is used. If \fITELAPATH\fP starts
with a colon, it is effectively appended to the built-in default.
This practive is highly recommended for normal users.
.B TELAPATH_SYSTEM
is read before \fITELAPATH\fP and is processed similarly. By setting it,
the system manager can e.g. override the compiled-in default.
.B TELA_PLOTMTV
gives the \fIPlotMTV\fP program to use. If not set, the name
\fIplotmtv\fP is used.
.SH FILES
.TP 8
.I *.t
Tela source code, loaded with \fIsource\fP().
.TP 8
.I *.ct
C-tela source. C-tela is C++ equipped with Tela function header
syntax. A preprocessor named \fIctpp\fP turns C-tela into ordinary
C++. Usually \fIctpp\fP is accessed indirectly through \fItelakka\fP.
.TP 8
.I *.o
Ordinary object files generated from \fI*.ct\fP files by \fItelakka\fP.
.TP 8
.I *.sgml
\fILinuxdoc-SGML\fP document file. Used by \fIhelp\fP function in \fItela\fP.
The \fILinuxdoc-SGML\fP package can produce plain ASCII, \fILaTeX\fP and HTML files out
of SGML files.
.TP 8
.I *.txt
Plain ASCII document/help files generated from \fI*.sgml\fP files.
.TP 8
.I *.dvi
DVI document/help files generated from \fI*.sgml\fP files. These can be
displayed by \fIxdvi\fP and turned into PostScript by \fIdvips\fP.
.TP 8
.I *.html
HyperText Markup Language document/help files generated from
\fI*.sgml\fP files. These files can be rendered with any
e.g. NCSA \fIxmosaic\fP or \fILynx\fP, and the user can follow the cross
references interactively. Because of this property, the HTML files
are the preferred way to read Tela documentation.
.TP 8
.I telainit.t
File that \fItela\fP usually reads when starting up. It is
searched in \fITELAPATH\fP.
.TP 8
.I ~/.telainit.t
User-specific startup file which the system-wide \fItelainit.t\fP
tries to source by default.
.TP 8
.I libtela.a
The main kernel archive.
.TP 8
.I dataplot.ps
PostScript file that \fIPlotMTV\fP creates when printing or pressing
the "Save PS" button.
.TP 8
.I dataplot.gif
GIF file that \fIPlotMTV\fP creates when pressing the "Save GIF" button.
.SH BUGS
Bugs and suggestions should be emailed to
<\fItela-bugs@fmi.fi\fP> and <\fItela-suggestions@fmi.fi\fP>, respectively.
It is a known problem that the program sometimes core dumps on syntactically
illegal source file. You can send reports on this problem also,
especially if your input file is simple and the core dump is produced
in a predictable way.
.SH SEE ALSO
\fItelakka\fP(1), \fITeLa\fP \fIK\fPernel \fIK\fPonstruction \fIA\fPccessory.
.br
\fIm2t\fP(1), \fIMatlab\fP to \fITela\fP translator.
.br
\fIplotmtv\fP(1), the program responsible for graphics by \fIKenny Toh\fP.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright 1994-1999, Pekka Janhunen.
.SH AUTHORS
Pekka Janhunen <Pekka.Janhunen@fmi.fi>,
.br
Finnish Meteorological Institute/
.br
Dept. of Geophysics (\fIFMI/GEO\fP).

