.\" $FMI/GEO: telakka.1,v 1.0 94/08/02 14:40:00 pjanhune $
.TH TELAKKA 1 "Version 1.0" ""
.SH NAME
telakka \- the TeLa Kernel Konstruction Accessory
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B telakka
[
.B \-c
] [
.B \-h
] [
.B \-n
] [
.B \-o
.I file
] [
.B \-v
] [
.B \-V
] [
.B \-\-compile\-only
] [
.B \-\-help
] [
.B \-\-nostandard
] [
.B \-\-output
.I file
] [
.B \-\-shared
] [
.B \-\-verbose
] [
.B \-\-version
] [
.B CFLAGS
] [
files
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fITelakka\fP is an auxiliary program to be used with \fItela\fP(1).  It
compiles files and links them with appropriate libraries to produce a
new Tela executable kernel. On systems that support it, it can also produce
\fIdynamic shared object\fP files which can be called from \fItela\fP(1) at runtime using
the \fIlink\fP function.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP 15
.B \-\-compile\-only
Compile only, do not link (as in \fIcc\fP(1)).
.TP 15
.B \-\-help
Give a short help message describing the options.
.TP 15
.B \-\-nostandard
Do not link standard Tela libraries. Normally not needed.
.TP 15
.B \-\-output
Name output file, as in \fIcc\fP(1).
.TP 15
.B \-\-shared
Produce a dynamic shared object (\fIDSO\fP(1)) file. The output file
name, if not determined by \fB\-\-output\fP option, is formed by suffixing
the basename of the first \fB*.ct\fP file with \fBso\fP.
.TP 15
.B \-\-verbose
Set \fItelakka\fP verbose: tells what it is doing.
.TP 15
.B \-\-version
Print version number and make a succesful exit.
.TP 15
.B \-c
Same as \fB\-\-compile\-only\fP.
.TP 15
.B \-h
Same as \fB\-\-help\fP.
.TP 15
.B \-o
Same as \fB\-\-output\fP.
.TP 15
.B \-v
Same as \fB\-\-verbose\fP.
.TP 15
.B \-V
Same as \fB\-\-version\fP.
.TP 15
.B CFLAGS
Any options to the C++ compiler/linker.

.SH FILES
.TP 8
.I *.ct
C-tela source. C-tela is C++ equipped with Tela function header
syntax. A preprocessor named \fIctpp\fP turns C-tela into ordinary
C++. Usually \fIctpp\fP is accessed indirectly through \fItelakka\fP.
.TP 8
.I *.o
Ordinary object files generated from \fI*.ct\fP files by \fItelakka\fP.
.TP 8
.I libtela.a
The main kernel archive.
.SH SEE ALSO
\fItela\fP(1), the \fITe\fPnsor \fILa\fPnguage.
\fIm2t\fP(1), \fIMatlab\fP to \fITela\fP translator.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright 1994, Pekka Janhunen.
.SH AUTHORS
Pekka Janhunen <Pekka.Janhunen@fmi.fi>,
.br
Finnish Meteorological Institute/
.br
Dept. of Geophysics (\fI/FMI/GEO\fP).

